=encoding UTF-8

=head1 NAME

holo-build - cross-distribution system package compiler

=head1 SYNOPSIS

holo-build [I<option>...] < I<file>

holo-build B<--help|--version>

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Holo adds a few sprinkles on top of package management to make it suitable for
basic configuration management tasks. Its prime directive is to have all
configuration statically declared and defined within packages, which can be
installed to add new configuration, or uninstalled to remove configuration from
a system.

However, the tools for creating system packages are optimized towards compiling
applications for tarballs, and introduce needless complexity when you just want
to package up a few files and list some dependencies. holo-build provides a
simple, distribution-independent package description language and generates a
system package from such a description.

For example, the following package description will build a package that
installs and configures C<systemd-timesyncd> with a custom NTP server:

    [package]
    name     = "hologram-systemd-timesyncd"
    version  = "1.0"
    requires = ["systemd"]
    setupScript   = "systemctl daemon-reload && systemctl start systemd-timesyncd"
    cleanupScript = "systemctl stop systemd-timesyncd"

    [[file]]
    name     = "/etc/systemd/timesyncd.conf.d/server.conf"
    content  = """
        [Time]
        NTP=ntp.someserver.local
    """

    [[symlink]]
    # as created by `systemctl enable systemd-timesyncd`
    name     = "/etc/systemd/system/sysinit.target.wants/systemd-timesyncd.service"
    target   = "/usr/lib/systemd/system/systemd-timesyncd.service"

The package description format is described below.

=head1 OPTIONS

=over 4

=item B<--stdout>/B<--no-stdout>

By default, the resulting package will be placed in the working directory using
the naming convention for the corresponding output package format. If
B<--stdout> is given, the package will be printed directly to standard output
instead.

=item B<--pacman>

Generate a C<pacman> package (suitable for Arch Linux and derivatives). This is
currently the only available format, but once there are multiple output formats
available, this switch can be used to override format auto-selection (which
checks the current distribution).

=item B<--reproducible>

Try to generate a package that is more reproducible, that is: does not contain
any timestamps and such. This switch does not actually guarantee a 100%
reproducible package.

This switch should be considered internal, and only be used for testing
purposes.

=item B<--help>

Print out usage information.

=item B<--version>

Print out Holo's version string including the release name.

=back

=head1 PACKAGE DESCRIPTION FORMAT

Package descriptions are written in TOML format.

=for html <p class="follow"><a href="https://github.com/toml-lang/toml">TOML specification »</a></p>

Only the C<[package]> section is required. All other sections (and all fields
not marked as required) are optional.

=head2 C<[package]> section

This section is required and contains global properties for the package.

    [package]
    name    = "example-package"
    version = "1.2.5-alpha.2"
    epoch   = 2
    release = 3
    description = "An example package"
    requires    = [ "other-package >= 2.0" ]
    provides    = [ "example-package-api = 1.2" ]
    conflicts   = [ "bloatware-package" ]
    replaces    = [ "sample-package" ]
    setupScript   = "touch /etc/example.conf && systemctl reload cron"
    cleanupScript = "rm -r /var/lib/example"

=over 4

=item B<name> (string, required)

The package name. This string may never contain any slashes or newlines. The
output format may impose additional charset or size restrictions on the package
name. As a rule of thumb, the pattern C<[a-zA-Z0-9-]+> is a safe set of allowed
package names.

=item B<version> (string, required)

The package version. To ensure sanity, holo-build enforces a relatively strict
pattern, inspired by the Semantic Versioning spec. Basic version numbers must
be numbers (C<0|[1-9][0-9]*>) chained together by dots:

    version = "1.2.3"
    version = "0.10"
    version = "20151015"
    version = "2015.10.15"

For pre-releases, a suffix of dot-separated alphanumeric labels
(C<[A-Za-z0-9-]+>) may be added, separated with a dash:

    version = "1.0-alpha.1"

=item B<epoch> (unsigned integer)

An increase in the epoch (default: 0) can be used to force the package to be
seen as newer than any previous version with a lower epoch. This is used when
the version numbering scheme for a package changes, breaking normal version
comparison logic.

=item B<release> (unsigned integer)

The release number (default: 1) can be appended if the same package is rebuilt
multiple times without its contents changing, in order for the built packages
to be distinguishable from one another.

=item B<description> (string)

A description of the purpose and contents of this package.

=item B<requires> (array of strings)

A list of other packages that must be installed when this package is installed.
Some package managers call these I<dependencies> instead. When a specific
package version is required, a version test can be appended, using one of the
operators C<=>, C<< > >>, C<< >= >>, C<< < >> or C<< <= >>. If multiple version
tests are required, the same package can be stated multiple times.

    [package]
    # require any version of foo, and a 2.x version of bar
    requires = [ "foo", "bar >= 2.0", "bar < 3.0" ]

When the package contains any files below C</usr/share/holo>, a requirement

    requires = [ "holo" ]

is implied automatically.

=item B<provides> (array of strings)

A list of other packages (or virtual packages) that the software provides the
features of. This means that this package can satisfy another package's
requirement for the provided package. If a specific version is provided, this
can be specified with the same syntax as for C<requires>.

    [package]
    name     = "rewrite-of-foo"
    provides = [ "foo = 2.1" ] # this package acts like foo-2.1

=item B<conflicts> (array of strings)

A list of other packages that may not be installed when this package is
installed. Version tests can be added using the same syntax as for C<requires>.

=item B<replaces> (array of strings)

A list of obsolete packages that this package replaces. If this package is not
installed, but one of the obsolete packages is installed, a system upgrade will
result in the obsolete package being uninstalled, and this package being
installed as a replacement.

If this package can replace the obsolete package, but it shall not be replaced
automatically, don't use this; reference the obsolete package in both
C<provides> and C<conflicts> instead.

=item B<setupScript> (string)

A shell script that will be executed (as root) when the package is installed or
updated, after the package files have been extracted to the file system.

If the package contains any files below F</usr/share/holo>, then C<holo apply>
will automatically run before this setup script is executed, so you can rely on
provisioned files, user accounts and groups to be available already.

=item B<cleanupScript> (string)

A shell script that will be executed (as root) when the package is being
uninstalled, after the package files have been removed from the file system.

If the package contains any files below F</usr/share/holo>, then C<holo apply>
will automatically run before this cleanup script is executed.

=back

=head2 C<[[file]]> section

Each one of these sections define a file to be added to the package.

    [[file]]
    path    = "/etc/foo.conf"
    mode    = "0600"
    owner   = "foouser"
    group   = "foogroup"
    # alternative 1
    content = """
        content for foo.conf
        content for foo.conf
    """
    # alternative 2
    contentFrom = "input.txt"

=over 4

=item B<path> (string, required)

The path to this file. The path must be absolute and may not have a trailing
slash.

=item B<content>/B<contentFrom> (string, exactly one required)

If the C<content> field is given, it contains the content of this file.
Alternatively, C<contentFrom> may reference a file whose contents will be used.
This file must be present at package-build time; relative paths will be
interpreted relative to the current working directory of the C<holo-build>
process.

=item B<raw> (boolean)

To aid readability, the C<content> field allows strings to have indentation
which will automatically be pruned. The following two content specifications
are equivalent:

    content = """
    content for foo.conf
    content for foo.conf
    """

    content = """
        content for foo.conf
        content for foo.conf
    """

To disable this behavior and use leading whitespace verbatim, set the C<raw>
flag:

    raw     = true
    content = """
        content for foo.conf
        content for foo.conf
    """

=item B<mode> (string)

The mode bits for this file. Since TOML does not support octal number
literals, this field must be given as a string containing an octal number:

    mode = "0600" # rw-------
    mode = "0755" # rwxr-xr-x

=item B<owner>/B<group> (string or int)

The owner (or group) for this file. If this field contains an integer, it is
interpreted as the ID of the user or group. If this field contains a string, it
is interpreted as a user/group name.

Since user/group names cannot be mapped to IDs at package build time, specifying
a name will result in the file being packaged as belonging to user/group
C<root>, and the actual user/group will be applied at install time using
L<chown(1)> or L<chgrp(1)>.

=back

=head2 C<[[directory]]> section

Each one of these sections define a directory to be added to the package.

    [[directory]]
    path = "/var/lib/foo"
    mode = "0600"
    owner = "foouser"
    group = "foogroup"

Note that directories are usually created automatically when files are placed in
them. A C<[[directory]]> section is only required to include an empty directory
in the package, or to assign non-standard permissions or specific ownership to a
directory.

=over 4

=item B<path> (string, required)

The path to this directory. The path must be absolute and may not have a
trailing slash.

=item B<mode>/B<owner>/B<group>

These are the same as for C<[[file]]> sections; see above.

=back

=head2 C<[[symlink]]> section

Each one of these sections define a symlink to be added to the package.

    [[symlink]]
    path   = "/etc/foo.conf"
    target = "bar.conf"

=over 4

=item B<path> (string, required)

The path to this directory. The path must be absolute and may not have a
trailing slash.

=item B<target>

The symlink target. Both relative and absolute targets are acceptable.

=back

=for Comment
################################################################################
# NOTE: This document generates both the manpage and the website's             #
#       man-holo.html. The following sections only appear in the manpage.      #
################################################################################

=begin :man

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<holo(8)>

=head1 AUTHOR

Stefan Majewsky

Further documentation is available at the project homepage: http://holocm.org

Please report any issues and feature requests at Github: http://github.com/holocm/holo/issues

=end :man

=cut
